---
layout: post
title: November
---


It was freezing and windy, hardly the day for their annual walk. Cambridge was at its quietest; the streets empty on a holiday weekend; the sky flat and gray. The trees, barren this late in the year, gave the wind nothing to rustle, and the leaves on the ground had been rained on, dirtied, folded and torn; no longer something one might consider picking up and admiring and maybe even taking home to press in a book, between sheets of wax paper. The pavement itself, bleached gray from road salt, had faded.

Alex turned up his collar as he walked up Jackie's cross street. The brick houses came in a line, with low metal fences and gates, or with high wooden ones, with stone front walks, with thick glass windows, often and preferably trimmed in white. Each home whispered of non-monetary wealth; of families, lovers, obligations; of lives with consequence and gravity. The twenty-five-year-old strolled along them, jealous, but free.

Jackie was sitting on the front steps of her house, although, of course, several years back she had begun calling it her father’s house. They said hello and headed on, towards Broadway, their hands warmly in coat pockets. The weather, he said, was near-December, and their every step was brisk.

We had literally just pulled in the driveway when you called, she said cheerfully. Anyway, when's your flight tomorrow?

I’m just taking a bus, he said. From South Station. It’s at ten, ten-thirty, something like that. When are you going to the airport?

Not till five.

And how is your father doing these days?

Fine, Fine. Old, though. She laughed and paused. He says hello. Where are we going now? she asked, although it didn't matter.

Oh, he answered, I don't know. 

It's so quiet out, she said. Where is everybody?

They decided to head towards the Charles, and turned down Hancock. This is one of my favorite streets, she said, looking all around. Though of course it's nicer in Spring or Summer. 

At the intersection with Harvard Street, a car stopped for them to cross, an old green Saab that looked light and fast and fuel efficient. I would love a car like that, he said. She agreed completely. It was very elegant, as much as any car could be. Who had the driver been, they conjectured; it was a professor, maybe. Overdue and out-of-print books in the back seat, sometimes shared with a dog. A professor of what? Of Philosophy? Of History? Of Mathematics, like her father? And what type of dog? A terrier! A beagle! No, a golden retriever, he supposed; an old one—or a labrador—and often taken walking in the woods, on muddy paths, out in Lincoln or Concord.

They passed the little park on Hancock, where Jackie remembered playing as a child. We always called it Doll Park, she said, because one time we went there, some other girl had brought a bunch of dolls, like these great old ones. We only saw them there one time after that though. Alex said how they had still lived in Natick then. Would we have been friends then? he asked. Oh yes of course, she replied, not needing to think about it.

At Mass Ave, they waited for a moment to cross. Cars trickled by, although the sidewalks were mostly vacant. Jackie looked for an opening, but Alex mostly watched her. She brushed her brown hair from her face. Could this Jacqueline Steagall, who he had known since they were twelve, really be a first grade teacher now? Have a classroom of twenty-four? Were they so grown up?

Come on! she said, let’s go, and they went running across the busy street. On the other side, they passed beside the Plough and Star, its pitch black facade, the tremendous sign, lettered in gold, that as children had convinced them each that whatever went on inside was magical. They had discussed this in the past—or remember, he said, that New Years Eve in high school, when, after midnight, Emma Strakley had tried to get inside to use the bathroom, but the man at the door had been strict and said no—even though, Jackie added, her friends were waiting outside for her, and she had asked nicely and was pretty and was clearly already drunk—and then Emma Strakley sprinted down the block and had used some gross employee toilet in the back of a convenience store.

They crossed Green Street—the narrow ancillary channel that cuts below Mass Ave; that blue house on the corner is nice, isn’t it? he remarked— and Franklin Street—which shared Alex’s last name—and then finally Kinnaird, where Hancock ended. They turned left. Wasn’t Kinnaird was a bird or something? Jackie asked. That’s canary, he said. 

No I know that! It’s something. An airplane, maybe?

You’re thinking of Canard, Alex said, which, yes, is something on a plane. It also happens to be French for duck. 

Then what is Kinnaird? she asked. 

I don’t know; nothing; a street in Cambridge.

She should have taken French in high school, she said. Everything would have been different. You did college right, she told him. Tiny liberal arts school, Paris for a semester. And for a Summer! What was I thinking back then? Though I turned out fine, I guess. You did, he said, meaning more than was understood.

They reached Putnam and did a left-right onto Flagg Street. Here were those basketball courts, and that other little park. (I just called it the playground near the river, she said, and there were like five places called that.) The walked below the great plate-glass windows of a Harvard dining hall, almost empty, four o’clock on a Saturday. Then, finally, they arrived at the river.

Where now? she asked.

Let’s go down, he said, cross over at Western Ave, then come back along on the other side.

That far? she said.

Sure.

Ok, she said, smiling.

Cars sped by along Memorial Drive, and once again, they waited for their moment. Again she brushed her hair from her face. It was an elegant mannerism that he was fond of, but, for the first time, he noticed how glamourous she was, or had become. Again, when their moment came, they ran across the street.

They now walked along the river, which wasn’t as blue as on nicer days. They walked past a set of concrete apartment buildings, built in the sixties, surely. Each apartment had a little terrace with a piece of white sheet metal for a bannister, like a little placard. See, Alex said, I love that style. I don’t know why.

On the other side of the river, was Harvard’s new building. Teal glass and orange sandstone. Jackie agreed that it was hideous. So obviously designed on a computer, Alex said. It looks like a software rendering, even in real life. I much prefer a good old ugly concrete building, Alex said. 

He had some things to say about cityscapes and rooflines, about architecture, about the density of buildings and the way, if one kept one’s eye fixed on the corner of a building as one walked down the street, the roofline behind it would change and unfold itself, over and over again. New York wasn’t the same, he said. The grid made things too straight on, and many of the buildings in Manhattan were too tall to even see their roofline, and the sidewalks were too crowded to be staring up into the sky while one was walking.

Look! she said, a rower!

In the center of the river, there was a single boat, a sculler clipping along with his long strides. His boat was white and his oars were black. He was wearing a gray something—one couldn’t say whether it was a sweatshirt or some synthetic space-age fabric—and a black winter hat. His skin was the only thing with any color; peach, oxygen, and red. I bet that feels like you’re flying, Jackie said.

I tried it once, Alex said. 

Really? I thought you had to be, like, a giant, or something. 

No. Just tall enough, I guess. Anyway, it was in college.They make a big recruiting pitch to any freshman that looks able-bodied. They have a whole freshman boat, I guess—or two boats. Anyway, I tried it for about a week. Enough to know I wouldn’t want to do it once it got cold.

I suppose it could get boring, Jackie said, doing that same motion over and over and over and over again.

The rower had advanced well past them. He had passed around the curve in the river and under the Footbridge. Inexperienced boats, at the Head of the Charles, could be seen crashing into the banks of the river at this turn, or just missing disaster. It was the most exciting place to watch from, Alex said. Sitting there and judging whether the boat had started turning early enough, or whether it was in trouble. Jackie said she had preferred to be on a bridge, leaning over and watching the boats go under. Neither of them, they realized, had been in town on that weekend since high school, anyway.

Now that they were on the bridge, crossing over the river, Jackie asked Alex what was that thing he had once said about the bridges. He said he didn’t remember. Oh, no, you know what I’m talking about, Jackie implored. Something about forks, I think. Ah, he said, pretending to have just remembered what it was. It was about the Charles in the winter, when the river is frozen—that the bridges are like silverware lying on a plate.

Yes that was it! Jackie said. That’s wonderful.

He disagreed. Images and metaphors like that are too obvious, he said. They don’t work properly. They really don’t. I thought that was what it was  all about, back, first couple years of college. All about beautiful metaphors.

What do you mean? she asked.

He explained what he had come to think about metaphors, how they were like a photograph, while an actual writer could do the same thing with a comma.

Well, she said, I think it’s wonderful. Anyway, would he tell her all about being a medical student? How was life in New York?

No, really, Alex said. Don’t make me. I’m talking too much already.

Jackie insisted that he did. That way, she explained, I won’t feel guilty when I go on and on about my classroom.

He told her a million of his observations—she loved listening to him describe things—and they decided to walk through the business school. There were curving paths that toured from one brick building, under arches, to other brick buildings. It reminded Jackie of when she had been a little girl, when, walking beside her father, they came down a sidewalk and street she had never seen before, when the right combination of turns could reveal an entirely novel world.

She tried to explain this feeling, the almost-magic of not-full understanding, to Alex. He said he thought he knew what she meant. He made a comparison to his college-era drive-abouts in Maine. There were places—roads, little intersections, little town centers—that seemed to pop up only when one was lost, and if one tried to drive there again, or look them up on a map, one never could find them. It was an effect, he said, especially strong in winter, when a foot of snow made everything look alike.

It’s going to snow tonight! she said. We heard it on the radio driving back this morning.

Not a lot though, he added.

No, thank god. Not a lot. It would be awful to have my flight cancelled. I’d have to get a sub for tomorrow.

She told him about her first graders: Maria and Demar and Kaylie and Owen and Olivia and Anthony and Rosario and Kyle. Poor Kyle! she said. He really does have a bad home situation. It’s really too bad.

They passed by the last hall and reemerged out on Harvard Street. Right in front of them was the ancient concrete stadium. Its two-storied arcade was the most exotic thing they had seen all day, and it was too grand a spectacle to resist. They both knew, remembering how Max Deandro never stopped boasting about running up and down the bleachers, that one of the stadium entrances was always left open. They crossed the street, looking both ways.

In search of an unlocked gate, they started around the outside of the giant horseshoe—like a hoofprint of the Horse in Troy, Alex said, although of course a stadium like this was more Roman than Greek. How did he know all these things? she wondered. Well, Alex knew everything. He always had. The name of every muscle and tendon, for instance. He has not shaved since Thursday, she observed. No, since Wednesday. The hair on his face was brighter brown than on his head. He looked to her like a toy soldier. He was full of bravery and nobility, she thought, and he welcomed the limitations of his imagined obligations. She felt he had done a Very Good Thing in becoming a medical student. No, she liked that very much.

There are thirty-four sections inside, Alex said. Max Deandro convinced me to come with him once—I made it through like twenty of the sections and had to wait for him to get to thirty-four, thirty-four. How many outside entrances were there? He didn’t know.  They kept walking. 

Eventually, they found the open gate, all the way at the other end. They went inside. It was very dark. It was getting dark outside, as well. They climbed up the stairs to the stands and looked all around the gray concrete arena. The artificial field was still bright green, with a enourmous crimson H at its center. Jackie started running up the stairs to the very top of the stands, and Alex walked up after her.

Jackie, at the very top, panting the cold in and out of her lungs, looked out over the top of the other athletic buildings and across the river and saw Cambridge.

There’s your roofline! she exclaimed down at Alex, who was still climbing the stairs.

When he reached her, he also saw it. They were so high up and the wind gushed stronger, and Jackie, brushing her hair from her face, said how cold it was. For a moment, listening to her, Alex felt tremendously happy. Quickly though, even as the sound of her comment faded in the air, the joy was replaced by the pain of a new wound, for the feeling had turned, almost immediately, to nostalgia.

—


Jackie said she thought she shouldn’t come inside, even though his mother would have loved to see her and hear how things were going, and that she should be getting home. My father will be thinking about dinner, she said.

It had gotten dark and had gotten colder. It was a heavy coldness, a pre-snow coldness. They said goodbye on the brick sidewalk outside his house. Until next year, they said, if not sooner. They each smiled slightly, and Jackie went off down the street. Alex headed up the steps and into the warm house, the three-story house with many walls and many windows and rooms and floors and ceilings.
