---
layout: post
title: Caring More
---

There was a movie called _Everest_ last year. It was all right, just a bit busy with too many famous actors. Robin Wright and Kiera Knightley appearbriefly as distant wives, called in by satellite phone from Texas and New Zealand. The two have ten minutes of screen time combined and not nearly enough to do. The movie's main problem isn't too much talent. The makers couldn't quite decide whether it was supposed to be a big movie or a small movie. There's a line between man vs nature (_Cast Away, Gravity, All is Lost_) and disaster action movie (_United 93, The Martian, The Perfect Storm_). _Everest_ doesn't quite know which side of the line it's on. Jake Gyllenhaal plays an expedition group leader and has the most memorable line of the movie. Climbing through an injury, he strains to cheerfully report over the radio, "It's the attitude, not the altitude."

This is one of those fourth grade teacher sayings that can lose meaning when said too much or with not enough thought. The originator of the phrase was Zig Ziglar, a salesman, motivational speaker, and, most importantly, salesman of motivational speaking. He would say, "It is your attitude, not your aptitude, that determines your altitude." While the practical limits of his advice are more real than he would like us to believe, we also keep getting more evidence about the importance of attitude and emotion.

The research and writing of Daniel Kahneman, Amos Tversky, Richard Thaler, and Cass Sunstein, among others, has shown how humans arerelentlessly human. In _Nudge_, Thaler and Sunstein write about the difference between the species Homo economicus, who are perfectly rational creatures and consistently make optimal decisions, and the species Homo sapiens, who aren't and don't. It's an important distinction and a reminder that our ability to make decisions is bound by more than cognition alone.

At the Yale Center for Emotional Intelligence, Mark Brackett and colleagues have shown that a student's understanding and regulation of their emotions strongly correlates with success, both academic and social. They've shown the same thing to be true among teachers. The best teachers have high emotional intelligence and the needs-improvement teachers have more room to grow. Brackett has studied business professionals and observed the same correlations. These emotional regulatory skills are

valuable, and society rewards proficiency in them. To take a statistically insignificant sample, Sunstein is married to the UN Ambassador, Brackett is head of the center at Yale because its founder became the university's president, and Thaler and Kahneman, bestsellers both, reach an audience of rare breadth for behavioral economists or psychologists.

Yale's Emotional Intelligence Center surveyed 22,000 teenagers about how they felt in school and found that, "Nearly 75 percent of the emotions listed were negative, such as tired, bored or stressed. The students also claimed to be 'bored' 70 percent and 'stressed' 80 percent of the time. When asked how they would like to feel, most said 'happy,' 'excited' or 'energized.’”<sup id="a1">[1](#note1)</sup>  This data point is more embarrassing than any test score. Bored 70 percent of the time! Educators know the importance of engagement, but our curriculum does so little to support it. Most high schools have no space for a curriculum in emotional intelligence, and so these things, if introduced at all,tend to be madea fad and misapplied.

Grit is one recent panacea. Educators have an intuitive understanding of the value of perseverance, which makes it easier to sell it to them. Brackett and his colleagues found that grit tells us much less about a student's ability to succeed than their ability to regulate their emotions. Describing the difference, "In contrast to the personality traits of Conscientiousness and Grit, [emotional regulation ability] describes individual's maximal capacity to evaluate emotion regulation strategies and to influence one's affective experience and actions in ways that promote goal attainment in emotionally charged situations (e.g., presence of competing goals, experience of challenges or obstacles)."<sup id="a2">[2](#note2)</sup> Grit is a personality trait which correlates with applying a particular problem-solving strategy. What really matters, though, is the individual's entire collection of problem-solving strategies and the ability to navigate that collection. Gritty students may be really good at applying hard work to solve problems. That skill can take them somewhere but not everywhere. What will they do when they need to be creative? How will they respond to injustice? What happens when they are failing not because of a lack of effort but because their fish died and they are sad, or because they are anxious about their mother maybe losing her job.

Grit is a one-size-fits-all solution.Humans are more complicated. The problems humans need to solve are more complicated. One strategy does not solve every problem. It's the attitude, not the altitude, but it's not always the same attitude. And because it's not always the same attitude that matters, we need to be skilled atchanging ours. This is as true of the individual student as of society as a whole.

Engagement and emotional intelligence are not synonymous, but they are related. In order for me to engage in an activity with the best mindset for that activity, I need to understand, label, and regulate my emotional state. I am feeling alienated or disgusted. If my painting teacher tells me we are going to do some initial sketches for a collaborative group painting, I need to do more than try hard if I am to succeed. I need to move myself to a more flexible, creative mindset. Similarly, if my task is to winnow a brainstormed list of twenty research topics down to one, it is not productive to be elated or festive. I need to be more critical, more negative, less celebratory. I can't write an argumentative essay if I feel serene. I don't want to go into a debate feeling blessed. And if I feel livid, how useful is all that grit going to be when I'm asked to write a self-reflection? In each case, there is an attitude mismatch. The things I need to care about in the moment are not what my mood would lead me care about. Motivation leads to a means of expression.

As teachers and students, we need to care more about caring. We can apply our cognitive abilities anywhere. We need to learn to aim them. Full development of students requiresthem to engage in multiple ways. If our students are always reflective and introspective, how will they make an argument or fight injustice? If students only practice critical thinking, what happens when they need to be creative? How doIlearn to care about something I don't care about?

This last question is the most fundamental. The world is big. Among the obstacles to the global empathy is a lack of adequate feedback. Helping someone in South Africa gives the helper less feedback than helping someone in South Carolina or in South Harlem. Moral markets and conscious consumption require this broader idea of kinship. Distancestrains our ability to form emotional attachments. Michalinos Zembylas and Charalambos Vrasidas describe the importance of what they call "critical emotional literacy." They see it as a requirement of a global and internet-reliant curriculum. The authors write, "The 'emotional' aspect is crucial to understanding self/other relationships online because, in the absence of co-presence, it is emotional attachments that construct images and identities of both self and other."<sup id="a3">[3](#note3)</sup> They come closest to identifying the broad need for emotional intelligence in a global, digital age. All these authors describe different parts of an elephant whose absence from the room they sense asa problem.

A similar lack of feedback exists in everyday online behavior. Cyberbullying can be so dangerous because the victim provides no feedback to the victimizer. There are no bystanders to shame or disapprove of the victimizer. Without being made to feel the effect of their bullying through a victim's or a bystander's facial expression, words, and body language, the bully is unrestrained. The internet is well known for its lack of decorum, and it's not just because of the anonymity. Emotionally intelligent students function better with less feedback than their peers. Not surprisingly, emotionally intelligent classrooms also tend to be healthy and supportive.

Today, we have foremost a deficitin engagement. This is also the case in secondary education,and that makes the problem all the more challenging. Healing the world requires more than comprehension. As Thaler and Sunstein have shown, people, who are also humans, will often do things they know are wrong. Malcolm Gladwell recently leaned on Thaler to discuss Wilt Chamberlain's refusal to shoot free throws underhanded, despite Chamberlain knowing it was the best way for him to score points.<sup id="a4">[4](#note4)</sup> Being educated isn't enough. Cognition without engagement is an engine without a transmission. The world needs engagement, not just literacy.

The models of ethical consumption only seem unrealistic because of how disengaged consumers are at present. This means neitherthatan ethical global economy is impossible nor that it is at odds with global capitalism. Like any economic system, global capitalism is just a set of technologies (prices, units of exchange, free and competitive markets, government regulation, banks,  interest rates, debt) for distributing goods and services. Like all technologies, capitalism is malleable. The current arrangement was not inevitable and is not unalterable. History has made the world's capacity for change abundantly clear. For the global economy to change, however, we have to be believe that our mindset matters and that our marginaleffect matters. And if the different eras of the global economy have only been different coats of the same paint– amoral control by the wealthy— it is also the case that we have never before seen an educated general population which is emotionally engaged with the world.

We have glimpses of what this might look like. The enthusiasm for saving the whales and saving the dolphins and saving the polar bears is notable both as an exception to apathy and as a preview of what broadly effective empathy might look like. By no accident are these animals our model.We want save whales and polar bears because animals are often more emotionally accessible than people. Barbar and Peter Rabbit, Winnie and Wilbur– half of our earliest protagonists are animals. We love animals. Humanity's single most altruistic habit is pet ownership. If a third grader is going to inspire their parents to make a behavioral change, it helps when the third grader has constant feedback about her family's participation in that change. If the family's way of saving the polar bears is to use canvas bags for groceries, eat less meat, and put on sweaters instead of the heater, the third grader can police that behavior pretty well. While she may not get feedback from the polar bear himself, she gets constant feedback from what she feels from helping the polar bear. When the way to helprefugees in Aleppo is to make a donation, write a letter to a congressman, or raise awareness, feedback becomes weaker and sporadic. With less feedback, continued emotional engagement requires greater emotional intelligence.

Teachers aren't teaching to save the world. We are teaching to foster better individuals who will maybe help to heal things. We want our third graders to turn off the lights when they leave a room. We want to help bring about a better educated citizenry. And we want these individuals to think globally, because we know the whole world matters. We also want them to care globally. Investigating, analyzing, and understanding a drought sounds like a great learning activity, but students need to practice more than the thinking part. There is a vital difference between a child studying overfishing because that is his assignment and studying overfishing because he cares about the present and future of the planet. It's easy to mistake activity for engagement.

Humans tend to be more engaged in the small movies of their own lives than in big movies of global crisis. Investment in a larger societal narrative is an emotionally challenging act but not a novel one. The difference saying between "good morning" to the grocery cashier and bringing our reusable canvas bags is one of scale, not kind. Expanding our empathy means expanding scale on which that empathy functions. And time matters as much as space. "A society grows great when old men plant trees" is a saying so old its author has been lost. It is Greek, that much we know.

Our American pursuit of happiness also has Greek origins. It is a eudaemonia, a societal well-being that comes from civic virtue not than material desire. "Pursuit of happiness" makes it first English-language appearance in John Locke's _Concerning Human Understanding_, a telling title.<sup id="a5">[5](#note5)</sup> Locke argues that true happiness cannot come from either pursuing desires or ridding ourselves of pain. The habituation of this pursuit will lead to more pain and desire, and satisfying either will sometimes require harming members of our community. A happy society cannot be based on the individual pursuit because this will lead its members into conflict. Rather, Locke argues, "We can change the agreeableness or disagreeableness of things."<sup id="a6">[6](#note6)</sup> We can change what we care about. If our pleasure is currently sourced from unethical consumption, we can change our attitude. "Pains should be taken to rectify these," Locke argues. "Contrary habits [should] change our pleasures, and give a relish to that which is necessary or conducive to our happiness."<sup id="a7">[7](#note7)</sup> Mary Poppins taught the same lesson in slightly different terms, singing, "In every job that must be done, there is an element of fun." We need to emotionally regulate such that we enjoy what is ethical. We can become skillful at finding the spoon full of sugar.

The Declaration of Independence is also concerned with the collective, not the individual. "We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights." It is left ambiguous whether each individual has a right to life, to liberty, and to pursue happiness, or whether these rights are extended only to the society formed by individuals. They have the right to pursue happiness, but this right does not necessarily apply to each of them. In any case, each individual only has the right to pursue a societal happiness. As Americans, we ought to consider a more collective holder of these rights than we have traditionally assumed. It might be a reach, but we so need to reach.

We need to reach, and we need to stretch. To create a global community, we need to expand our sense of self. We need a larger empathy. We need to be able to move between our personal drama and the big epic. We need to be fluent in both movies, and, just like any A-list actor, we should hope to always be too talented for our part. We need to engage in the world as both an individual and a collection of individuals. As a society, we need a group emotional intelligence to create a more caring world. Can we do any of this if we're all bored in school?

&nbsp;
&nbsp;

&nbsp;
&nbsp;

[<i id="note1">1</i>](#a1) — Catherine Robertson Souter, "Study: Youth bored and stressed," New England Psychologist, 1 January 2016, [http://www.nepsy.com/articles/leading-stories/study-youth-bored-and-stressed/](http://www.nepsy.com/articles/leading-stories/study-youth-bored-and-stressed/) (accessed 12 October 2016).

[<i id="note2">2</i>](#a2) —  Marc Brackett and Zorana Ivcevic, "Predicting school success: Comparing Conscientiousness, Grit, and Emotion Regulation Ability,"Journal of Research in Personality 52 (2014):29, [http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jrp.2014.06.005](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jrp.2014.06.005).

[<i id="note3">3</i>](#a3) —  Michalinos Zembylas and Charalambos Vrasidas, "Globalization, information and communication technologies, and the prospect of a 'global village': promises of inclusion or electronic colonization?" Journal of Curriculum Studies 37, no 1 (2005):75.

[<i id="note4">4</i>](#a4) — Malcolm Gladwell, "The Big Man Can't Shoot," Revisionist History, 29 June 2016, [http://revisionisthistory.com/episodes/03-the-big-man-cant-shoot](http://revisionisthistory.com/episodes/03-the-big-man-cant-shoot)

[<i id="note5">5</i>](#a5) — "As therefore the highest perfection of intellectual nature lies in a careful and constant pursuit of true and solid happiness, so the care of ourselves, that we mistake not imaginary for real happiness, is the necessary foundation of our liberty," John Locke, An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, 1689, Chapter 11, Section 51.

[<i id="note6">6</i>](#a6) — Locke, Concerning Human Understanding,Chapter 11, Section 69.

[<i id="note7">7</i>](#a7) — Locke, Concerning Human Understanding,Chapter 11, Section 69.