---
layout: post
title: Seinfeld's Joyce
---



At the time, the summer after my sophomore year, I was living in the dorms of Columbia University, which rents out rooms to students of any college who have come to New York City for internships or programs. I had never been to New York before. Although the fervor for internships in Nebraska was not nearly as extreme as in other parts of the country, especially for unpaid internships, one my professors had set everything up, and I couldn't refuse. 

The job was to work as a researcher and assistant to one of his old friends, a writer, journalist, essayist-type who had been hired by some fashion companies to put together a book, or at least a very long article, on the history of American clothing. I have no opinion of what other people wear and can hardly dress myself, and Jim Miller was no different. Nebraska was at least ten years behind the East Coast in terms of fashion, like a time machine to the mid-1990s. Neither of us knew why our employers had ever thought he was the man for the job.

Jim Miller told me he was a writer's writer's writer's writer, which meant that the very few people who had read him regarded him the way most people regard of Hemingway, Faulkner, Proust or, incidentally, James Joyce. He usually writes long nonfiction, profiles of people or places, always connecting everything with extreme precision and detail. In a Jim Miller story, there will never be flowers or trees or a house or a church. There will be three dozen tulips, still barely in bloom, or a row of old poplars, someone thought would be elegant, or a split level ranch, originally from the sixties but on its third coat of paint, this time a perhaps misguided seafoam, or a Presbytarian church, which, although the whole town regards highly, none pray at with any regularity or fervor.

His subjects are usually mundane things that few people would consider subjects. One of his relatively famous articles is about the annual town meeting of some small town in Western Massachusetts. Another is about a board of regents meeting at the University of Nebraska, presumably an arrangement my  professor, our mutual acquaintance, had something to do with. There is a wonderful one about a airline pilot who flies Seattle—Los Angeles and back again every day.

He taught at a boarding school for many years and every Christmas, upon being asked by the student editor, would contribute 500 words or so to the school paper. These little pieces— ordinarilly he runs very long— are some of the best things ever committed to print. By the third sentence, you will believe yourself to have attended the school and have great nostalgia for a place you've never heard of. Hard to believe, but it's true.

So, to speculate about why Jim Miller was hired for the task, I would say that it was because the companies didn't know exactly what they wanted, but they wanted something detailed, something with the right attitude, something painfully precisely written. I'm sure  someone had been congratulated for coming up with the idea of having Jim Miller do the job. Everyone who read him loved him, but he would also be very, relatively cheap. In terms of great sentences for the dollar, I can't imagine many people rate better.

In any case, that was why I was in New York. Jim had me mostly running around to various libraries and archives getting materials. Because I was living at Columbia, I would usually bring whichever two or three items he had requested on my way into the office every morning. The company had an room for him in their building. I don't know where he was living for the summer, but I imagined at the time that people like Jim Miller had an almost infinite number of acquaintances with spare rooms.

I made a good number of trips to the New York Public Library, as well as many more to private archives belonging to the great agencies and companies of New York. Everything was always arranged with whoever I was visiting, but I was viewed suspiciously by the corresponding summer interns— usually pretty girls a bit older and a bit smarter than me— who met me at the front desk and were assigned to bring me straight to the archive. Sometimes I half-expected my counterpart to produce a blindfold. Waiting for me in those private libraries would be some stern sort of person who would tell me what I could and could not look at, or transcribe, or photocopy, or photograph. For a twenty-year old boy from Nebraska, it was all very intimidating.

The work overall was enjoyable, though. It is a small thrill to be given access to all these private, expensive spaces, high up in tall buildings, seeing all these archives that very few people have access to. In some ways, it seems to me that status is the ability to enter as many different rooms and buildings as possible. The president of the United States, for example, could probably get himself into any room in the country, if he really wanted to, and he has access to a great many rooms that almost no one but him is ever allowed to enter. Meanwhile, a homeless man can hardly sit down in a coffeeshop. I don't mean to make a social commentary but just to say that being guided around all these offices made me feel more important than I was. Which is nice, once in a while.

Anyway, this is all to explain how I ever got myself to New York in the first place. I gained principally three things from that summer voyage. The first was an astounding amount of dreadful detail about the relationship of American culture and American clothes in every decade of the past century. The second was the knowledge that I could be in the presence of beautiful and sophisticated women and acquit myself well, which is significant information for a twenty-year old college student. The third thing I gained, or rather didn't gain, was a truly remarkable copy of Joyce's *Ulysses*.

Here is what happened. In early July, Jim Miller sent me to the *Vogue* archives for a second time. After fifteen minutes, I was met by same girl who had shepherded me in on my prior visit. She remembered me right away, by name, probably because not many outside visitors come to visit the archives. I don't know, but at the time I took as a vote of confidence. After I had been in the archives an hour or so, she came by to ask if I needed anything else, probably because she had nothing else to do, or more likely trying to hint that it was time for me to go. In any case, I was a determined flirt that day, and after sustaining the appearance of charm and intelligence longer than I have been able to do on any occassion since, we agreed to meet the next night, a Thursday, at a place she suggested— which was lucky as I would have had no idea whatsoever. The only restaurants I knew was, incidentally, the one that had been on *Seinfeld*, which was a block away from Columbia, and the Halal foodtruck that was on Broadway, right ouside the main gate and the Metro stop. And I knew no bars whatsoever.

Thursday afternoon I had looked the place up online, somewhere in the West Seventies, and determined it not too far to walk. I am usually a very fast walker, but I was worried about the heat and showing up sweaty and a mess. So, I left Columbia with time to spare. I ended up arriving twenty minutes early, which seemed to me as bad as being late, if not worse. There was a bookstore I had passed up the street, and I went returned there to pass the time.

When I entered, the storekeeper looked up from what he was reading, appraised me quickly, and then looked back down. He was an old man with a very round shaved head and a slight beard. He was a man, it seemed possible, who might have read every book ever written. I assumed he was the propietor, he gave a great impression of authority. It was a used bookstore, a *real* used bookstore, not one that only accepts books that meet some standard of quality, and not one that follows any other philosophy for display other than space efficiency. The shelves went from the floor to ceiling, and the aisles were very narrow. New arrivals, yet to be shelved, were piled in large cardboard boxes with duct-tape reinforced edges.

Bookstores are among the most reliable ways to kill an hour, and I was worried about keeping track of time, as well as a bit nervous in general. There were some interesting titles. Some obscure things. I tried to find a nonfiction collection I had seen on Jim Miller's desk in the office but could not.

In college libraries, James Joyce gets a lot of space. There are however many volumes of his couple of books, then a shelf of criticism, then a couple shelves for the all the editions of the *James Joyce Quarterly*, which has been printed since the early 1960s.

In bookstores, though, things are organized differently. First of all, you obviously won't find any issues of *James Joyce Quarterly*. Secondly, if there is a substantial literary criticism section, it will be by itself, separate from the authors and the original works to which its own volumes refer. So, Joyce, or any writer, will take up only as much space on the shelf as their actual books deserve. 

This used bookstore happened to have a fair number of his books, all different printings. There were a couple copies of *Portrait of an Artist*, a good number of *Dubliners*, five of *Finnegan's Wake*, and about a dozen editions of *Ulysses*. There were three different Random House versions, two copies of the 2000 Penguin paperback, a couple from Everyman's Library, one of the new version, and several different facisimiles of the 1922 first edition, including the 1998 Orchises Press version, which imitates the binding and overall design of the actual original. The one that stood out to me was a tall yellow hardcover, a sort of a textbook shape. It was cheaply bound. The cover was acrylic and buckram, the same tacky quality of library books. The book looked like it was made to be taught in a course or something. It was very unattractive and not of high quality. Somewhat of a bastard child. The marriage of a literary masterpiece and some guy with a printshop who had a bright idea and no one to tell him it wasn't.

Anyway, I was curious to see how exactly the printer had messed up the text itself. Opening it up, however, I was pleasantly surprised. The text was set very well, and the purpose, apparently, of such a large page size was to leave enourmous margins on all sides of the text, which gave room for the owner to scribble his or her marginalia. The paper was thick and white, and the previous owner had used pencil on every page. The owner of this copy had taken close to full advantage of the ample space, and each margin was close to full.

Curious about the publisher, I flipped back to the front pages looking for the copyright. On copyright page, I saw "Jerry Seinfeld" written in light gray pencil. "If lost please return to—" and then an address I can't remember. This was quite a discovery. Could it really have been Jerry Seinfeld's book? When had he been assigned this in a class? Where had he even gone to college? More importantly, what was Jerry Seinfeld doing selling used books to secondhand bookstores? Especially a book he had presumably done so much writing in. At the time, I was very skeptical, but more curious. It must have been some sort of joke someone had scribbled. I checked for a price on the back cover: $5.00. It certainly was being marked up because of celebrity.

But if it was true! If it really was Seinfeld's *Ulysses*. The insights he might have on it. The criticisms he might have offered. I could imagine it being delivered as part of an act. I read somewhere once that there was a laugh on every page of *Ulysses*. Was Seinfeld reading this for research? Was Jerry Seinfeld a great Joycean scholar? It was all too interesting, too amusing, too odd to ignore.

I decided to buy it, really how could I not? But I could not take it with me and carry it around all night. I felt that I had made a real discovery, and was determined not to take the infinitesimally small chance of it disappearing between now and tomorrow morning, when I would come back before work to pick it up.

I brought it to the man at the front and asked if he could hold it till the next day. He said nothing and made no expression. I offered him twenty dollars to hold it. He consented and I left, trying to regain the mental state I had been in the first time I had walked down the street that evening. In any case, the date when well enough not to be embarassing and poorly enough to be safely irrelevant.

That night I read what I could about Jerry Seinfeld to see if any part of his biography supported my find. He had spent a couple years at Queens College, which, although it was nearby, seemed to make his selling a used textbook in the Upper West Seventies unlikely. But perhaps he had sold it a bit later in life, when he needed some money. Comedians did always need money. College students always needed money, that much I knew as an absolute truth. But even if it was authentic, it seemed even more unlikely that it could have sat unpurchased, undiscovered on the shelf for thirty years. Regardless, it was only five dollars, well twenty, in my case.

The next day I went back to the store. The man wasn't there. There was a woman working, an extraordinary-looking middle-aged woman, close to six feet tall and who I will never forget. Half her hair was gray and she seemed to watch everything ravenously, devouring whatever she saw. She said there was nothing on hold, that no note about any book had been left at the counter, that there was nothing she could do. Maybe it was in the back, I suggested.

"Dear," she said, "We don't have a back. This is all there is."


I went back the next week, the same time I had gone oringally, to find the man who I had given Seinfeld's *Ulysses* too. Its odd disappearance had confirmed for me its authenticity.

"Don't blame me, you never came back!" the man said. "I put it back on the shelf, someone bought it early this week. Look, kid, I'm happy to give you your money back. Or you can buy one of the other copies we have. It's all the same inside."

Whether he was lying or not, I was too polite to challenge him. In any case, the book was a lost cause. I went and got another copy because it seemed the easiest thing to do. I bought it and he gave me change for my twenty. That one, very strange copy exists somewhere, and is unlikely ever to be found again. 