---
layout: post
title: Getting in Trouble
---

The Concord Academy library, at least during the four years I attended the school, wasn't anything to show off. It still showed up in the alumni magazines and admissions brochures, the pictures taken with great care from deliberate angles. The photographer labored to make the space impress. The library was two rooms on a single floor of the main school building. The first room had two large tables in the center, several carrels around the perimeter, the circulation desk, a magazine rack, two alcoves each with four computers, a printer, and a bookshelf of the course reserves. Above the windows on the walls were wooden engravings of the Ten Deadly Virtues: Self-Respect, Honesty, Generosity, Consideration, Cleanliness, Initiative, Perseverance, Responsibility, Friendliness, and Citizenship. Their provenance was unknown to us, and, though the values still resonated throughout the school's daily life, the engravings themselves went unaddressed. The library's roof was pitched. It had skylights, or at least I remember it having skylights.  The second room of the library had many more carrels in the center, a dozen aisles of bookshelves and then waist height shelves around the outer edge. One could enter the library in either room. It had doors on both ends. It sat between the science laboratories and the dining hall on one end and the History and English classrooms on the other. People cut through between every class. It was a multipurpose space: library and hallway.

If the library's coziness was not something the school boasted about to prospective students, they didn't miss a chance to talk up the student-teacher ratio. The average class size was driven down somewhat by the German classes. None had more than six students. We were four of us in my class all through high school. We were taught by Susan Adams. Most teachers at Concord went by their first name, but, while we were in class, we called her Frau Adams. She was sixty years old, five feet one inch tall, and second violin in the school orchestra. She was from Cleveland, Ohio. Without exception, she broke character to pronounce her hometown in as American an accent as possible. A real radio announcer voice. "Ja, und ich komme aus… Cleveland, Ohio. _The Mistake on the Lake_!"

She focused our curriculum on post-war Germany. We spent most of our time in the DDR. We ignored Kafka, Mann, and Goethe. Instead, we read the screenplay of The Lives of Others and Goodbye, Lenin. We read Brecht, and we read many obscure personal essays about life in the DDR which I'll never be able to track down without my old teacher's help. These things don't exist on the internet, and, with just faint memories of single sentences, I doubt I could find them anyway.

We learned how political daily living could be. When a ruling regime extends itself as deeply into the daily lives of its constituents as the SED, everything matters. How you brush your teeth, how you eat breakfast, how you go to school, how you answer a math question— everything is political. This pervasiveness helps explain way totalitarianism is both unpleasant and hard to maintain. The more universal a strategy of control, the more opportunities for tactical subversion. The press criticizes you, so you take over control of the press. Now, anything anyone publishes might be subversive. When you criminalize thought, rebellion is trivial.

Our school made it difficult to rebel. Policies were based on the principle of common trust. Teachers left the room during tests. The art studios were never locked. The library had no checkout sensors. Academic and social discipline was determined by seven member discipline committees, each consisting of three teachers and four students. There was little authority to undermine or overthrow, but that didn't stop us from trying.

Some of our transgressions involved what the dean of students called social lubricants. More often, they involved leaving the grounds at the wrong time or leaving without telling the right person. If we missed our Wednesday recycling duty or one of our kitchen duties, we would get sent to the facilities crew for work on a Saturday. This form of punishment was called work jobs, a term I knew was poorly worded the first time I heard it. Some students made work jobs a habit. They would skip a class or skip sports practice. Boarders could get them for dirty rooms. Work jobs were much worse for us day students, though. We would have to come in at eight on a Saturday morning. We couldn't just roll out of bed and walk over to the maintenance barn in our pajamas. Most of us kept our noses clean most of the time. In the average week, the closest we came to trouble was Martha Kennedy warning us that if we didn't quiet down, we would have to leave the library.

"_Some_ people are _trying_ to work," she would say. "Might I suggest you take this conversation elsewhere? I hear the light in the dining hall is lovely this time of day."

Someone would make a charming reply.  "Yes, but the company is so much worse, Martha." Sometimes Martha would give us a task. "If you're not going to work," she would propose, "would you at least help your classmates by reshelving a few books?" And we would. We were not bad citizens, just loud ones. And, since Martha Kennedy never used the real power she had to kick us out or assign us work jobs, we could hardly complain of being oppressed.

With her library as small as it was, she occasionally discarded old books to make room for the new. Sometimes, she would ask us to organize these on a cart and make a sign, "Free Books looking for a Good Home." So we would get first pick. Books that libraries don't want tend to be books one would never find otherwise. This was how I found out about the Ten Deadly Virtues.

It was in a thin, 54-page pamphlet of nine talks given by an old headmistress, Elizabeth B. Hall. The book, _Through Crowded Ways_, was published by the school's Board of Trustees in 1959. The cover is a heavy weight paper, faded from whatever its original shade to the gray seafoam of Fenway Park. Printed in green ink is a drawing of two dogs promenading down an aisle of the school's chapel, the benches occupied by its young women. Elizabeth Hall gave a talk on each of the ten virtues during assemblies throughout each school year. The carvings came later. Hall recalls that, in the first year, "Along towards the end of my talking, some girls came to me and said that I had talked about so much and for so long that they could not remember any longer what I had said at the beginning. It was not part of my plan to let that happen, so I spent spare moments during the summer carving out the plaques." This comes from a talk titled, "On Self-Respect," delivered January 17th, 1955. And Hall describes how the Virtues got their name, "I heard on girl asking another why there were ten virtues when there were only seven deadly sins, and the reply came that she guessed virtue was 'maybe more deadly than sin.'"

I had stared up at those plaques in the library so many times that I had stopped looking at them. Then, with the mystery of the ten wooden plaques solved, I headed off to college. The University of Michigan was a school too large to have a community. The libraries were sterile and tantalizingly close to big enough to get lost in. Some of my classes were larger than my high school. Having an old headmistress with me was fortifying. Universities have no interest in the ethics of its studentry. They are completely bureaucratic. They take no responsibility for moral education. Sometimes I needed to remind myself that these things mattered.

From "The Ugly Question of Discipline," April 9th, 1958.

> Once a senior told me that she had thought Concord Academy was an "easy" school until she had "found out.' There was something so sinister in her tone that I hardly dared to asker what it was that she had “found out.”"Well," she explained, "the trouble is, you have to think.”[…]<br /><br />In my day it was considered sensible to run a "strict" school. The pattern of life in the nineteenth century was far more stable than it is today. I did not, I hasten to add, live in the nineteenth century. But just behind me were several generations who had come to believe, with reason, that the habit of obedience was the greatest gift that they could bestow upon their children. The world was ordered. [...]<br /><br />Today, in your generation, it is not sensible to run a strict school. Your world is not ordered. I do not believe that the nineteenth century was as ordered as people thought it was. About the twentieth century, there is not even an argument.

If obedience was senseless in the twentieth century, it is dangerous in the twenty-first. We have run out of time for following the example of previous generations. The planet cannot support it anymore. I think about East Germany before the Wall came down. That story is told as one of a totalitarian state, an oppressive bureaucracy controlling its citizenry's every thought and every movement. Yet it was also a society of constant rebellion. In private spaces, people lived revolutionary lives, even as they perpetuated the state in their public ones.

This double life is lived by many an educator. In faculty meetings, in conversations with each other, in the privacy of their home on a Wednesday night, they complain about content standards. They complain about the accountability regimes and the emphasis on obedience. I wish I could, they say, but standards. And every day they teach a curriculum they don't like. They don't like it and they don't change it. It's not their fault, but nor are they victims. They find small ways to rebel. They focus on critical thinking and analysis instead of content knowledge. They turn multiple choice questions into short essays. Maybe they have a focus on writing. Maybe they have a research project. But supplements never stop being supplementary.

The best of these double-life teachers both service and subvert the obedience curriculum. They communicate that growing up requires sometimes doing things we disagree with. Still, we shouldn't allow the value of that lesson to excuse the problems with obedience. Just because we disagree with a policy doesn't mean enacting it improves our character. Not everything we disagree with deserves our respect. Turning educators into tragic figures who disagree with the requirements made of them is a silver lining in a sky that should be cloudless. It's fine to celebrate those who make the best out of their circumstance, but this can't lead to ignoring problems.

My first class on my first day at Concord Academy was Early Modern Europe. The teacher was Deanna Douglas. She was tall, white-haired, and energetic. She was a part-time rabbi in a congregation on Cape Cod. Her favorite question was, "So What?" She was always asking us that. Why do these things matter? The Thirty Years War, so what? The Protestant Reformation, so what?  We would answer, and then she would say, "Ok, _or_…?" And we would come up with a different reason why these things mattered. A different so what. Then she would ask again, "Why _else_ might this matter?"

She demanded we consider meanings beyond the truth. The truth, after all, is just what happened to happen. The truth has real reasons behind it, and real causation, but also real luck. The truth involves details that aren't that meaningful. By considering alternatives and contradictions, we tried to consider the past as if it were the present. Deanna didn't allow us the comfort of narrative simplicity. Narrative doesn't tell the whole story. It ignores what could have happened but didn't. The content knowledge curriculum is an obedience curriculum because it demands we know the right answer. It demands we attach the right meanings to events. What could have happened becomes wrong answers. Yet events only get their one correct meaning in retrospect. By asking us to master the one correct meaning for as many different items as possible, the content knowledge curriculum leaves no space for evaluation, creation, or prediction. If we are taught to wait for the future to determine the meaning of the present, we are bound to be followers. It's irresponsible to withhold judgment when the present demands a response. If our goal is to understand the world, we can't always be gazing into the past. We need to quicken our interpretive timeline.

Contemporary understanding does not mean we rush to judgment, it just means we need to have ways of understanding the world apart from history. We need non-retrospective, non-narrative ways of ascribing meaning to events. These abound. We need geography, economics, environmentalism, sociology, philosophy, literature, psychology, anthropology, the list goes on. The global citizen needs many talents. We need to get messy.

The question of discipline was "ugly" for the old headmistress because disciples are followers and she wanted a school full of leaders. Students full of initiative, generosity, and self-respect. The absence of rules creates ambiguity. This creates the opportunity to get in trouble without rebelling. Functioning in adversity requires self-discipline, the act of following yourself. This is why our teachers left the room during exams. This was why we had a choice of which classes we took each term. We learned to lead ourselves.

Global citizenship requires self-discipline because the world is big. The world is big, and it is full of ambiguity. We need to function in that ambiguity. It requires us to think, so we need to able to. We need to be self-disciplined because obedience won't take us anywhere worth going. Democracy doesn't work with followers.

Most mornings these days, I take the elevator to the basement. The exit there is at street level. It is faster than getting off on the first floor and walking through the lobby. This morning I hesitated and pressed _1_ instead. I wanted to see the security guard at the front desk and say good morning. Usually the security guards, god bless them, are sitting there quietly, looking at something on the computer or their phone. But today, on this morning, they were talking, passionately, about the election. They didn't notice me, and I passed by without saying a word.

On the subway platform, a third grader wrapped her arms around her mother's waist. On the train, people stared blankly, partly out of habit– the overriding ethic of New York City public transit is never make eye contact– and partly because they were in a daze.

I am hopeful. Every disaster is an opportunity. The problems the world needs to address are, for better or worse, beyond the office of the American presidency. The ice melts. The forests burn. The birds don't care about our horserace. Feeling fine brought us here. Considering the challenges we face as a species, fear might be appropriate.

We should be careful about the stories we tell about what happened. The failure of Americans is not how we vote. It's how we eat. It's the cars we drive. It's how we live and how we think. It's our failure to understand the American way of life is wrong. The failure to understand it has to change. The problem is a tight grip on the belief that our right to a two car garage, a single-family house, and a quarter-pound of cow flesh three times a week is god given. The problem is the maintenance of conservatism as a valid political belief when there has never been a version of the United States worth conserving. There is no past worth returning to. There is only the future. All this was a problem on election day. It was going to be a problem whoever won. It was a problem in the last election, and it was a problem ten years ago. We cannot allow it to still be a problem ten years from now.

The problem and the solution are education. Beyond the school systems, more than test scores and college debt, we need to learn and teach each other to be better. We need to become more ethical, more considerate, more generous, and more self-disciplined humans. We just need to be better at living. Every day.

Hope is the belief that things can change. It demands action. Just because something is difficult, doesn't mean we can't do it. Just because something hasn't already happened, doesn't mean it never can. I'm hopeful because making mistakes is how you learn. Getting in trouble is how you learn. We've been getting for a quite a while. Now that trouble has come, we learn and we get better.