---
layout: post
title: Walking in the Hall
---

As a three-year-old, BSSCC was the most-­syllabled word I possessed. It was the name of my preschool: Brookline Schools Staff Children’s Center. For my classmates and I, it wasn’t an acronym, and it didn’t stand for anything. It was just a word: *bee-ess-ess-see-see*. Sometimes, after my mother picked me up at four o’clock, we went back to her elementary school. It would be mostly empty. I could do enough with the plastic cubes her students used for math to keep myself occupied while she finished her work. Sometimes she would have visitors— other teachers usually, sometimes former students come down from the seventh or eighth grade. School was demystified early on. 

My mother kept the comments the BSSCC teachers wrote about us after each half of the year– one hesitates to call them semesters. “Danny has a strong sense of fairness,” my teacher reported. “He also is not afraid to point out to others the flaws in their thinking. One day at snack Rachel and Josiah said they didn’t want the oranges. Danny asked, ‘Well do you like orange juice?’ They said they did. ‘Then you should like oranges. It’s the same thing.’” The teacher’s comments go on for six pages. I was imaginative. I was good at including others in activities. I was mostly well behaved but, on occasion, extremely anxious. The evaluation was of my whole self. Being a good citizen in preschool is a lot of work. You have to participate, you have to share, you have to listen, you have to be creative, you have to accept otherness, you have to be nice.

At Harrington Elementary School, no one was better at walking down the halls than Ms. Rankin’s kindergarten class. We were the best. Better than the other kindergarten sections, better than the first graders, better than the second graders, better than everyone. Only part of this was obedience and respect for our teacher, who was, we thought, the best person. But we disobeyed Ms. Rankin plenty inside our classroom. We believed that to be good was to be quiet while we walked in the halls. The older kids were *learning*, so you had to be quiet not to *disrupt* them. It was *respectful*. As we walked by the doors of each classroom, our heads would turn to peer in. What were the *third * graders doing? These elementary classrooms were my first experiences of citizenship. I was a member of a community. I had responsibilities, and I had rights, and I knew my rights. Who has a more vibrant understanding of justice than a first grader? The civics of kindergarten classrooms may be cute, but they are also much more strongly defined and practiced than that of grown-ups. Without celebrating ignorance, one might look to learn from the kindergarteners, so careful not to disrupt the older grades. Why are they the best at walking down the hall?

The Concord Academy library, at least during the four years I attended the school, wasn’t anything to show off. It still showed up in the alumni magazines and admissions brochures, the pictures taken with great care from deliberate angles. The photographer labored to make the space impress. The library was two rooms on a single floor of the main school building. The first room had two large tables in the center, several carrels around the perimeter, the circulation desk, a magazine rack, two alcoves each with four computers, a printer, and a bookshelf of the course reserves. Above the windows on the walls were wooden engravings of the Ten Deadly Virtues: Self-Respect, Honesty, Generosity, Consideration, Cleanliness, Initiative, Perseverance, Responsibility, Friendliness, and Citizenship. Their provenance was unknown to us, and, though the values still resonated throughout the school’s daily life, the engravings themselves went unaddressed. The library’s roof was pitched. It had skylights, or at least I remember it having skylights. The second room of the library had many more carrels in the center, a dozen aisles of bookshelves and then waist height shelves around the outer edge. One could enter the library in either room. It had doors on both ends. It sat between the science laboratories and the dining hall on one end and the History and English classrooms on the other. People cut through between every class. It was a multipurpose space: library and hallway. 

If the library’s coziness was not something the school boasted about to prospective students, they didn’t miss a chance to talk up the student-teacher ratio. The average class size was driven down somewhat by the German classes. None had more than six students. There were four of us in class all through high school. We were taught by Susan Adams. Most teachers at Concord went by their first name, but, while we were in class, we called her Frau Adams. She was sixty years old, five feet one inch tall, and second violin in the school orchestra. She was from Cleveland, Ohio. Without exception, she broke character to pronounce her hometown in as American an accent as possible. A real radio announcer voice. “Ja, und ich komme aus… Cleveland, Ohio. *The Mistake on the Lake!*”

She focused our curriculum on post-war Germany. We spent most of our time in the DDR. We ignored Kafka, Mann, and Goethe. Instead, we read the screenplay of *The Lives of Others* and *Goodbye, Lenin.* We read Brecht, and we read many obscure personal essays about life in the DDR which I’ll never be able to track down without my old teacher’s help. These things don’t exist on the internet, and, with just faint memories of single sentences, I doubt I could find them anyway.

We learned how political daily living could be. When a ruling regime extends itself as deeply into the daily lives of its constituents as the SED, everything matters. How you brush your teeth, how you eat breakfast, how you go to school, how you answer a math question— everything is political. This pervasiveness helps explain why totalitarianism is both unpleasant and hard to maintain. The more universal a strategy of control, the more opportunities for tactical subversion. The press criticizes you, so you take over control of the press. Now, anything anyone publishes might be subversive. When you criminalize thought, rebellion is trivial.

Our school made it difficult to rebel. Policies were based on the principle of common trust. Teachers left the room during tests. The art studios were never locked. The library had no checkout sensors. Academic and social discipline was determined by seven member discipline committees, each consisting of three teachers and four students. There was little authority to undermine or overthrow, but that didn’t stop us from trying.

Some of our transgressions involved what the dean of students called social lubricants. More often, they involved leaving the grounds at the wrong time or leaving without telling the right person. If we missed our Wednesday recycling duty or one of our kitchen duties, we would get sent to the facilities crew for work on a Saturday. This form of punishment was called work jobs, a term I knew was poorly worded the first time I heard it. Some students made work jobs a habit. They would skip a class or skip sports practice. Boarders could get them for dirty rooms. Work jobs were much worse for us day students, though. We would have to come in at eight on a Saturday morning. We couldn’t just roll out of bed and walk over to the maintenance barn in our pajamas. Most of us kept our noses clean most of the time. In the average week, the closest we came to trouble was Martha Kennedy warning us that if we didn’t quiet down, we would have to leave the library.

“*Some* people are *trying* to work,” she would say. “Might I suggest you take this conversation elsewhere? I hear the light in the dining hall is lovely this time of day.”

Someone would make a charming reply.  “Yes, but the company is so much worse, Martha.” Sometimes Martha would give us a task. “If you’re not going to work,” she would propose, “would you at least help your classmates by re-shelving a few books?” And we would. We were not bad citizens, just loud ones. And, since Martha Kennedy never used the real power she had to kick us out or assign us work jobs, we could hardly complain of being oppressed.

With her library as small as it was, she occasionally discarded old books to make room for the new. Sometimes, she would ask us to organize these on a cart and make a sign, “Free Books looking for a Good Home.” So we would get first pick. Books that libraries don’t want tend to be books one would never find otherwise. This was how I found out about the Ten Deadly Virtues.

It was in a thin, 54-page pamphlet of nine talks given by an old headmistress, Elizabeth B. Hall. The book, *Through Crowded Ways*, was published by the school’s Board of Trustees in 1959. The cover is a heavy weight paper, faded from whatever its original shade to the gray sea-foam of Fenway Park. Printed in green ink is a drawing of two dogs promenading down an aisle of the school’s chapel, the benches occupied by its young women. Elizabeth Hall gave a talk on each of the ten virtues during assemblies throughout each school year. The carvings came later. Hall recalls that, in the first year, “Along towards the end of my talking, some girls came to me and said that I had talked about so much and for so long that they could not remember any longer what I had said at the beginning. It was not part of my plan to let that happen, so I spent spare moments during the summer carving out the plaques.” This comes from a talk titled, “On Self-Respect,” delivered January 17th, 1955. And Hall describes how the Virtues got their name, “I heard on girl asking another why there were ten virtues when there were only seven deadly sins, and the reply came that she guessed virtue was ‘maybe more deadly than sin.’”

Junior year of high school, my calculus teacher, Deborah Gray, was also the school’s scheduler. She was precise and deliberate, took points off for the smallest things, computed class averages for every question on her tests. She didn’t give homework, she gave problem sets. Her one indulgence was that she canceled class during the week of add-drop. She was too busy. A former student had written the scheduling software as a senior project. He had adapted it from a sudoku program. It did about the half work of scheduling the school’s studentry. Deborah Gray did the rest. 

A year later, as a senior, knowing all this annoyed me. I had gotten my classes and found that it was impossible to fit both Painting 4 and Advanced Physics on the same schedule. I was bothered by the school’s ideals of multi-talented students bumping up against the realities of logistics. I went to Deborah Gray in her small office to ask if it might be possible to figure something else. She pulled up the old sudoku program and showed me that, no, unfortunately not. It was a sort of accident, but not really. Overlapping students in these classes were apparently very rare. No one found out that they couldn’t co-register Physics and Computer Science, for example. Yet, at some point, the point I found myself, it just became impossible to take the appropriate levels of painting and physics in the same semester.

Concord Academy seniors each gave what is called a Chapel. Three times a week, the whole school gathered in an old Baptist church, and one senior gave a fifteen-minute speech about whatever they want. We all listened politely. Common trust was found here, as well. The speaker trusted the audience to be respectful and the audience trusted the speaker to neither waste their time nor take advantage of their attentive listening. It was an education in individuality. Over four years, we heard nearly four hundred different talks. Every week, we all had a shared common experience and were in the same room doing the same thing. When we got bored, and the talks were often boring— how many times can you listen to someone account for their privilege?— we glanced up at the ceiling and traced the wooden beams trussing back and forth.

And I had stared up at the plaques in the library so many times that I had stopped looking at them. Soon after I solved the mystery of their origin, it was time to leave for college. The University of Michigan was a school too large to have a community. The libraries were sterile and close to big enough to get lost in. Some of my classes were larger than my high school. Universities have no interest in the ethics of its studentry. They are completely bureaucratic. At Michigan, I had no former calculus teacher to whom I could complain. At Concord, I had been class president one year. At Michigan, I didn’t know how to vote in student elections. The bureaucracy dehumanizes us by making less of us count. At Michigan, my academic performance counted, my tuition counted, the rent I paid my landlord counted, my attendance at sporting events counted. The whole self, really, did not.

In this country, I now find myself an adult citizen, and even less matters. The national community values only my vote, my taxes, my labor. Being a citizen is being less than a full human being. The American definition of citizenship leaves out how good a parent, a spouse, a friend, a grandson we are. It doesn’t care about what we know or what we wonder. It wants a very different type of participation than what our teachers asked of us in class. One feels almost nostalgic for the citizenship of the 1950s when doing your math homework was a patriotic act of anti-communism

In the 1990s in East Germany, they called this type of yearning *Ostalgie*. The former socialist state had obsessed about the private lives of its citizens, and citizenship required much more than casting a vote. Susan Adams had us watch the film *Goodbye, Lenin*— nine or ten minutes a day in class, and then seventy minutes of discussion. The movie is about a family. *Ostalgie* is a central theme. The mother is a patriotic socialist. The twenty-something son is ambivalent. She has a heart attack and enters a coma. The Wall falls soon after. When she wakes up, the doctors warn the family that any excitement may trigger another attack. The son and the neighbors try to create the illusion that the socialist state is still intact and that the Wall hasn’t fallen. He can’t find her favorite brand of pickles in the supermarket. So, he goes dumpster diving for an old jar and puts new pickles in it. She wants to watch the news; he records a broadcast. Eventually, she wanders out of the apartment. She is walking down the street confused; a helicopter flies by, a giant bronze statue of Lenin in tow.

In their recreation of the old state, the son and all the neighbors begin to miss it. There was monotony, but there was community. There was a place for everyone. The police state required participation. People were their own oppressors. If it was miserable, it was collective misery. Vaclav Havel, in his 1990 New Years Eve address, described the fact of this participation.<sup id="a1"><span class="inline">Vaclav Havel, “New Years Address to the Nation,” <a href="https://chnm.gmu.edu/1989/archive/files/havel-speech-1-1-90_0c7cd97e58.pdf">chnm.gmu.edu</a>.</span></sup>

> When I talk about the contaminated moral atmosphere, I am not talking just about the gentlemen who eat organic vegetables and do not look out of the plane windows. I am talking about all of us. We had all become used to the totalitarian system and accepted it as an unchangeable fact and thus helped to perpetuate it. In other words, we are all— though naturally to differing extents— responsible for the operation of the totalitarian machinery. None of us is just its victim. We are all also its co-creators.

The active participation in government, even in the task of restricting individual liberty, is another, collective type of freedom. Restricting a neighbor’s freedom of speech and them restricting yours is a perverse type of democracy, of self-rule. 

Timothy Garton Ash draws on Havel’s remarks in his account of the 1989 revolutions, *The Magic Lantern*. This co-creation of the state made it harder for Czechs and Slovaks and Germans and Poles to free themselves from the toxicity of the past. It also suggested that in revolution, not everything was worth overthrowing. Garton Ash brings back the observation of Rahl Dahrendorf, who observed that Karl Marx’s use of the word bürgerlich could be read as bourgeois but also as civil. Garton Ash, paraphrasing the appeals of the revolutionaries:<sup id="a2"><span class="inline">Timothy Garton Ash, The Magic Lantern, (New York: Vintage Books, 1990) 148-149.</span></sup>

> Yes, Marx is right, the two things are intimately connected— and we want both! Civil rights and property rights, economic freedom and political freedom, financial independence and intellectual independence, each support the other. So, yes, we want to be citizens, but we also want to be middle-class.

Northern European countries have largely succeeded in accomplishing this third way, this socialism with a human face. And I think about Concord Academy, where we had intellectual freedom but were held to high standards of civic participation. We had to be in class. Once there we were free to take up any side of an argument. There were three meals a day, and every morning we sat in Chapel and affected the appearance of an interested audience. We couldn’t come and go from the school as we please. We couldn’t talk in the library. We could use the art studios at any time, and we had to keep them clean and organized. Individual liberties balanced against collective ones.

Balancing liberty and responsibility has been long contested. Democracy, more often than not, means ruling others and being ruled by others. Democracy rarely means ruling oneself. After the French Revolution, Benjamin Constant wrote about two types of liberty: that of the ancients and that of modernity.<sup id="a3"><span class="inline"> Benjamin Constant, The Liberty of the Ancients Compared with that of the Moderns, 1819, <a href="http://oll.libertyfund.org/titles/constant-the-liberty-of-ancients-compared-with-that-of-moderns-1819">oll.libertyfund.org</a>.</span></sup> In the United States, Constant observes, “It is the right of everyone to express their opinion, choose a profession and practice it, to dispose of property, and even to abuse it; to come and go without permission, and without having to account for their motives or undertakings.” Meanwhile, in the ancient states, liberty meant “exercising collectively, but directly, several parts of the complete sovereignty; in deliberating, in the public square, over war and peace; in forming alliances with foreign governments; in voting laws, in pronouncing judgments; in examining the accounts, the acts, the stewardship of the magistrates; in calling them to appear in front of the assembled people, in accusing, condemning or absolving them.” This collective liberty came at the expense of individual rights. Today, we can think about the freedoms one gives up when becoming an elected official. President Obama’s individual liberty is considerably less than it will be after he leaves office. The tension is that active and meaningful participation in collective self-government limits individual freedom. At the most minute level, if you are mandated to vote, you are less free. Jury duty takes a few days of your life. And this is very weakly defined collective liberty. Active democracy takes up a lot of time and energy.

Our pursuit of happiness comes less from the expression of our constitutional rights to speech, religion, assembly, and armament and more from our positive personal interactions with each other. The kindergarteners understand this. Citizenship is not just about your rights. It is about sharing and listening and holding the door for the next person. Citizenship is about membership. You hold the door and turn off the lights because you are living in a society. It is as much custom as rights, government, and freedom. 

Of course, these customs are not always good. Citizenship in "The Lottery" is stoning a mother. There are places all over the world where local practices are violent and immoral, and most places have at least some customs that fit this description. One needs a vivid enough definition of self, a definition divorced from culture, precisely so that one can evaluate those customs. An educated global citizen holds beliefs independent of locality. We must be cosmopolitan, but not mindlessly so. I need to be enough an individual to stand apart from what I believe to be wrong and to work against it.

If these collective and individual liberties are difficult to balance in a country or a school, the task only becomes more challenging when we consider the globe. Freedom involves compromise. The freedom to drive a car or eat an animal affects someone else. A global citizen understands a collective liberty such that driving a car or eating animal hurts not just someone else but also themselves. Living in a community means that your rights and welfare concerns me, not because I am charitable or altruistic, but because I understand that we are connected and what impacts you impacts me. I’m not quite in the halls to be nice to you. I’m quiet in the halls because your learning matters to me.

Figuring out what matters in community is the tricky part. It’s tricky in a school and it’s trickier in the world at large. The old headmistress, Elizabeth Hall, saw the importance of this finding out part. From “The Ugly Question of Discipline,” April 9th, 1958:

> Once a senior told me that she had thought Concord Academy was an “easy” school until she had “found out.” There was something so sinister in her tone that I hardly dared to ask her what it was that she had “found out.” “Well,” she explained, “the trouble is, you have to think.” […]

> In my day it was considered sensible to run a “strict” school. The pattern of life in the nineteenth century was far more stable than it is today. I did not, I hasten to add, live in the nineteenth century. But just behind me were several generations who had come to believe, with reason, that the habit of obedience was the greatest gift that they could bestow upon their children. The world was ordered. […]

> Today, in your generation, it is not sensible to run a strict school. Your world is not ordered. I do not believe that the nineteenth century was as ordered as people thought it was. About the twentieth century, there is not even an argument.

If obedience was senseless in the twentieth century, it is dangerous in the twenty-first. We have run out of time for following the example of previous generations. The planet cannot support it anymore. I think of Susan Adams talking about East Germany before the Wall came down. She told the story of, yes, a totalitarian state, an oppressive bureaucracy controlling its citizenry’s every thought and every movement, but also of a society of constant rebellion. In private spaces, people lived revolutionary lives, even as they perpetuated the state in their public ones. 

And I think back to my first class on my first day at Concord Academy— Deanna Douglas’s Early Modern Europe. She was tall, white-haired, and energetic. She was a part-time rabbi in a congregation on Cape Cod. Her favorite question was, “So What?” She was always asking us that. *So what?* Why do these things matter? The Thirty Years War, *so what?* The Protestant Reformation, *so what?*  We would answer, and then she would say, “Ok, *or*…?” And we would come up with a different reason why these things mattered. A different so what. Then she would ask again, “Why *else* might this matter?”

She demanded we consider meanings beyond the truth. The truth, after all, is just what happened to happen. The truth has real reasons behind it, and real causation, but also real luck. The truth involves details that aren’t that meaningful. By considering alternatives and contradictions, we tried to consider the past as if it were the present. We weren’t allowed the comfort of narrative order. Narrative doesn’t tell the whole story. It ignores what could have happened but didn’t. We had to rebel against the truth, not allow it to close off every alternative meaning. This rebellion required self-discipline. It had to be honest questioning, not adolescent rejection of the world as it exists. Criticism, not denouncement.
 
The question of discipline was “ugly” for the old headmistress because disciples are followers and she wanted a school full of leaders. Students full of initiative, generosity, and self-respect. The absence of rules creates ambiguity. This creates the opportunity to get in trouble without rebelling. Functioning in adversity requires self-discipline, the act of following yourself. This is why our teachers left the room during exams. This was why we had a choice of which classes we took each term. We learned to lead ourselves.

Global citizenship requires this self-discipline because the world is big. The world is big, and it is full of ambiguity. We need self-discipline to remind ourselves how connected we are to each other. It’s rarely obvious. We have to think. My global citizen education was learning how to be an individual and how to belong to society. Citizenship requires both, in vibrant quantity. If a high school requires its members to possess ten deadly virtues, shouldn’t the world require at least as many? As I went from preschool to high school to college to adulthood, I encountered an ever-smaller sense of citizenship. This shouldn’t be so. As we grow up, our increasing individuality should make our societies stronger, not weaker. Why are kindergarteners the best at walking down the hall?