---
layout: post
title: You Can’t Go Home Again
---

In the last weekend of January, many people spent many hours at the airport. Some of these people were held there against their will, the victims of a president’s attempt to begin cleansing the United States of its Muslim population. Those detained included university professors, graduate students, political refugees, government employees, nurses, doctors, aerospace engineers, biochemists, physicists, kindergarteners, third-graders, grandmothers, interpreters who had served alongside troops in Iraq and Afghanistan, mothers, fathers, husbands, wives, sons, and daughters. Some have student visas. Others have H-1B visas, granted on the basis of the applicant’s expert skill and the benefits their labor provides to the United States. Many of the people stuck at airports are permanent residents. The state told them they could not return to their permanent residence. A red light for green cards. You can’t go home again.

The president promised his supporters a return to an America that never existed. They want to Make America Great Again, but never have they told us when America was great. Was it the 1980s, when income inequality soared and a wave of globalization closed factories and carried them to foreign shores? Was it the 1950s, when we didn’t allow women to move beyond the secretarial pool, when black children and white children went to separate schools, and when their parents’ ability to get a mortgage and buy into a ebbing tide of middle class wealth also depended on the color of their skin? They want us to go back to a time when what Ta-Nehisi Coates has called the dream of whiteness was stronger and greater than it is today. They can’t go home again. We won’t let them. It may be an American Dream, but it is not the American Dream.

What does it mean to be an American? Was Frederick Douglass more American than his slaveowners? Were the civil rights protesters in Birmingham any more American than the police shooting them with fire hoses? Was Michael Brown more American than Darren Wilson? We have been fighting over the meaning of this word, American, for centuries. We have to continue that fight.
The other group of people who spent their weekend at the airport chose to be there. They were the protestors, vast in number, righteously outraged at the cruelty of their government. They were loud, defiant, and supportive. Lawyers came to help out. The newspapers reported what was happening. In the courts, lawyers dismantled the executive order’s pretense of legality. Judges issued stays. The powerful display of public opinion convinced sheepish elected officials to stop calculating the direction of the wind and just say the obvious. As people were released, they were met by cheering crowds. For a second straight Monday, people went to work feeling a little bit better because of the mass resistance of Saturday and Sunday. The news from Washington is that protest is the new brunch.
As Rebecca Solnit advised us years ago, it’s always too early to stop protesting. In her magnificent 2004 book, *Hope in the Dark*, Solnit wrote, “It’s always too soon to go home.” Our times require constant vigilance, but then they always do. Complacency is how we got here.

Maybe Barack Obama speaks so slowly because people just can’t seem to understand him. Again and again, he said, “I’m not talking about blind optimism.” Time after time, he implored us not to “ignore the enormity of the tasks ahead or the road blocks that stand in our path.” He warned us not to “just sit on the sidelines or shirk from a fight.” We nodded our heads, cast a ballot, and went home thinking we had achieved something. That’s not what he meant. Mandates don’t come from vote totals, they come from the people who cast the votes. Where were we when Republican congressmen and senators blocked and delayed the repeal of Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell? Where were we when those same obstructionists stood in the way of the DREAM Act, legislation that set out to create a path for citizenship for immigrant youth? Where were we when these public servants defied the constitution and refused to even hold hearings for Merrick Garland? Where were we during the protests in Ferguson? Did we think recycling paper and plastic was good enough to preserve our environment? Where were we during the Obama administration’s continued failure to stop the horrors in Syria? Where have we been these past eight years, making sure our elected officials, both Democrats and Republicans, did the jobs we elected them to do? What did we do when we learned the Republican presidential nominee was a sexual assailant? We were outraged for a weekend or two, then we went home. We can’t do that. In America today, you can’t go home again.